[Doc] Add API reference for external array interactions (#1677)
taichi-dev/taichi: docs/external.rst

.. _external:

Exporting and importing data

> ============================

Reviewer: I actually think the old title is clearer. "Data" can refer to many things, and people may mess up this part with PLY/mp4 exporting if we use the new title.

Author: ```suggestion
Interacting with external arrays
================================
```

Introduction
------------

> Taichi fields are aimed to be used in Taichi-scope.
> Despite we may also access Taichi fields elements in Python-scope too,
> that's not very efficient when accessing a lot of elements in a Taichi field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Taichi fields are aimed to be used in Taichi-scope.
However, sometimes we may need to access Taichi field elements in Python-scope, 
which is not very efficient when a lot of elements within the field are required.
```

> Taichi fields are aimed to be used in Taichi-scope.
> However, sometimes we may need to access Taichi field elements in Python-scope,
> which is not very efficient when a lot of elements within the field are required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although Taichi fields are mainly used in Taichi-scope, in some cases efficiently manipulating Taichi field data in Python-scope can be helpful.
```

> So we provide a way to export and import data in Taichi fields via NumPy arrays.
> This allows you to interact with the data in Python-scope with other packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, we provide handy functions for flexible conversion between Taichi fields, NumPy arrays, and PyTorch tensors.
```

Author: `between Taichi fields, NumPy arrays, and PyTorch tensors` sounds confusing to me.
It can increase learning barrier, beginners may ask: What is NumPy and PyTorch? Which is the best way for me?

If we say `export and import data in Taichi fields via NumPy arrays.`.
Beginners will say: Oh I see, NumPy seems to be a hard dep of Taichi, let me learn NumPy first!

---

Note that PyTorch is an optional dependency that is not used by most of end-users.
We don't provide `to_blender`  despite `taichi` could be useful in Blender.
NumPy will stay "superior" since I believe PyTorch and Blender do provide NumPy interface too.

My idea is: **As lone as a package provides NumPy interface**, we don't need to customize a `to_xxx` for it.
`to_torch` is just for decreasing memory overhead IMO.

Author: OK, `to_torch` is here to stay, but given that it's aimed to reduce memory overhead, let's do not emphasis it too much in a section faced to beginners.

**Export data in Taichi fields to a NumPy array** via ``to_numpy()``.
This allows us to export the computation result and pass it to other

> Python packages that supports numpy, e.g. matplotlib.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Python packages that support numpy, e.g. matplotlib.
```

> **Export data in Taichi fields to a NumPy array** via ``to_numpy()``.
> This allows us to export the computation result and pass it to other
> Python packages that support numpy, e.g. matplotlib.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Export data in Taichi fields to a NumPy array** via ``to_numpy()``.
This allows us to export computation results to other
Python packages that support NumPy, e.g. ``matplotlib``.
```

.. code-block:: python

   @ti.kernel
   def my_kernel():
      for i in x:
         x[i] = i * 2

   x = ti.field(ti.f32, 4)
   my_kernel()
   x_np = x.to_numpy()
   print(x_np)  # np.array([0, 2, 4, 6])

**Import data from NumPy array to Taichi fields** via ``from_numpy()``.

> This allow people to initialize Taichi fields via numpy array, e.g.:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows people to initialize Taichi fields via NumPy arrays. E.g.,
```

.. code-block:: python

   x = ti.field(ti.f32, 4)
   x_np = np.array([1, 7, 3, 5])
   x.from_numpy(x_np)
   print(x[0])  # 1
   print(x[1])  # 7
   print(x[2])  # 3
   print(x[3])  # 5

API reference
-------------

> We provide interface sharing data with both NumPy and PyTorch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We provide interface to share data with both NumPy and PyTorch.
```

> We provide interface to share data with both NumPy and PyTorch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We provide interfaces to convert Taichi fields between NumPy arrays and PyTorch tensors.
```

Reviewer 3: I have a question here, actually what these functions do are deep copy, right? So `share` is not appropriate apparently. However,  `convert`  is a little misleading as if the object itself is converted.

So maybe you could consider `passing a converted copy` or sth similar.

Author: ```suggestion
We provide interfaces to copy data between Taichi fields and NumPy arrays.
```
@Eydcao How about this?

Reviewer 3: It looks good to me, :> you can also ask some opinions from @yuanming-hu whether to use copy or convert.

Thx,

Interacting with NumPy
**********************

> 

Author: ```suggestion

We provide interfaces to copy data between Taichi fields and NumPy arrays.

```

.. function:: field.to_numpy()

   :parameter field: (ti.field, ti.Vector.field or ti.Matrix.field) The field

   :return: (np.array) The numpy array containing the currrent data in ``x``.

.. function:: field.from_numpy(array)

   :parameter field: (ti.field, ti.Vector.field or ti.Matrix.field) The field

   :parameter array: (np.array) The numpy array containing data to initialize the field

Interacting with PyTorch
************************

> 

Author: ```suggestion

We also provide interfaces to copy data directly between Taichi fields and PyTorch tensors with less overhead.
These functions allows you to copy from GPU -> GPU with **less overhead** than GPU -> CPU -> GPU.

```

> .. function:: field.to_torch(device = None)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. function:: field.to_torch(device=None)
```

Author: See `vector.rst`, it seems that `device = None` is a common style in doc..

Reviewer: OK.

   :parameter field: (ti.field, ti.Vector.field or ti.Matrix.field) The field
   :parameter device: (torch.device) the device where torch tensor is created

   :return: (torch.Tensor) The torch tensor containing the currrent data in ``x``.

.. function:: field.from_torch(tensor)

   :parameter field: (ti.field, ti.Vector.field or ti.Matrix.field) The field

   :parameter tensor: (torch.Tensor) The torch tensor containing data to initialize the field

> The shape of external array to interact with Taichi fields
> ----------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
External array shapes
---------------------
```

> Taichi fields have shapes (see :ref:`scalar_tensor`). NumPy array also have shapes.
> So what's the relationship between them when using the ``to_numpy()`` and ``from_numpy()``?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shapes of Taichi fields (see :ref:`scalar_tensor`) and those of corresponding NumPy arrays are closely connected via the following rules:
```

> - For scalar fields, **the shape of NumPy array should be exactly the same with the Taichi field**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For scalar fields, **the shape of NumPy array is exactly the same as the Taichi field**:
```

.. code-block:: python

   field = ti.field(ti.i32, shape=(233, 666))
   field.shape  # (233, 666)

   array = field.to_numpy()
   array.shape  # (233, 666)

   field.from_numpy(array)  # the input array must be of shape (233, 666)

> - For vector fields, if the vector is ``n``-D, then **the shape of NumPy array should be** ``(*field_shape, vector_n)``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For vector fields, if the vector is ``n``-D, then **the shape of NumPy array is** ``field_shape + (vector_n,)``:
```

Author: It does work:
```py
>>> shape = (2, 3)
>>> (*shape, 4)
(2, 3, 4)
```
I would use the original one since it's more clear at first glance.

Reviewer: Yeah I know that star expression works fine here, but I'm not sure how many people can easily understand this fancy usage.

Author: My idea was people may confuse tuple `+` with scalar `+`..

Reviewer 3: Both `tuple + scalar` and `*tuple` are confusion. What about a sentence of explanation of astroid like `, where the asteroid symbol before the tuple means xxx`

Reviewer: I agree. Maybe we should simply use examples and text description instead. No need to test users' Python skills here.

Author: Yeah we have examples, see L117-124.

Reviewer: OK sounds good.

.. code-block:: python

   field = ti.Vector.field(3, ti.i32, shape=(233, 666))
   field.shape  # (233, 666)
   field.n      # 3

   array = field.to_numpy()
   array.shape  # (233, 666, 3)

   field.from_numpy(array)  # the input array must be of shape (233, 666, 3)

> - For matrix fields, if the matrix is ``n*m``, then **the shape of NumPy array should be** ``(*field_shape, matrix_n, matrix_m)``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For matrix fields, if the matrix is ``n*m``, then **the shape of NumPy array is** ``field_shape + (matrix_n, matrix_m)``:
```

.. code-block:: python

   field = ti.Matrix.field(3, 4, ti.i32, shape=(233, 666))
   field.shape  # (233, 666)
   field.n      # 3
   field.m      # 4

   array = field.to_numpy()
   array.shape  # (233, 666, 3, 4)

   field.from_numpy(array)  # the input array must be of shape (233, 666, 3, 4)

Using external arrays as Taichi kernel arguments
------------------------------------------------

Use the type hint ``ti.ext_arr()`` for passing external arrays as kernel

> arguments, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
arguments. For example:
```

So we provide a way to export and import data in Taichi fields via NumPy arrays.
This allows you to interact with the data in Python-scope with other packages.

**Export data in Taichi fields to a NumPy array** via ``to_numpy()``.
This allows us to export computation results to other
Python packages that support NumPy, e.g. ``matplotlib``.

.. code-block:: python

   @ti.kernel
   def my_kernel():
      for i in x:
         x[i] = i * 2

   x = ti.field(ti.f32, 4)
   my_kernel()
   x_np = x.to_numpy()
   print(x_np)  # np.array([0, 2, 4, 6])

**Import data from NumPy array to Taichi fields** via ``from_numpy()``.
This allows people to initialize Taichi fields via NumPy arrays. E.g.,

.. code-block:: python

   x = ti.field(ti.f32, 4)
   x_np = np.array([1, 7, 3, 5])
   x.from_numpy(x_np)
   print(x[0])  # 1
   print(x[1])  # 7
   print(x[2])  # 3
   print(x[3])  # 5

API reference
-------------

We provide interface to share data with both NumPy and PyTorch.

Interacting with NumPy
**********************

.. function:: field.to_numpy()

   :parameter field: (ti.field, ti.Vector.field or ti.Matrix.field) The field

>    :return: (np.array) The numpy array containing the currrent data in ``x``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   :return: (np.array) The numpy array containing the current data in ``x``.
```

.. function:: field.from_numpy(array)

   :parameter field: (ti.field, ti.Vector.field or ti.Matrix.field) The field

   :parameter array: (np.array) The numpy array containing data to initialize the field

Interacting with PyTorch
************************

.. function:: field.to_torch(device = None)

   :parameter field: (ti.field, ti.Vector.field or ti.Matrix.field) The field
   :parameter device: (torch.device) the device where torch tensor is created

>    :return: (torch.Tensor) The torch tensor containing the currrent data in ``x``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   :return: (torch.Tensor) The torch tensor containing the current data in ``x``.
```

Interacting with external arrays
================================

> Introduction
> ------------
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Although Taichi fields are mainly used in Taichi-scope, in some cases efficiently manipulating Taichi field data in Python-scope could also be helpful.

We provide various interfaces to copy the data between Taichi fields and external arrays.

> The most typical case maybe copying between Tachi fields and Numpy arrays. So, let's take a look at the 2 examples below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most typical case maybe copying between Tachi fields and Numpy arrays. Let's take a look at two examples below.
```

**Export data in Taichi fields to a NumPy array** via ``to_numpy()``.
This allows us to export computation results to other
Python packages that support NumPy, e.g. ``matplotlib``.

.. code-block:: python

   @ti.kernel
   def my_kernel():
      for i in x:
         x[i] = i * 2

   x = ti.field(ti.f32, 4)
   my_kernel()
   x_np = x.to_numpy()
   print(x_np)  # np.array([0, 2, 4, 6])

**Import data from NumPy array to Taichi fields** via ``from_numpy()``.
This allows people to initialize Taichi fields via NumPy arrays. E.g.,

.. code-block:: python

   x = ti.field(ti.f32, 4)
   x_np = np.array([1, 7, 3, 5])
   x.from_numpy(x_np)
   print(x[0])  # 1
   print(x[1])  # 7
   print(x[2])  # 3
   print(x[3])  # 5

API reference
-------------

We provide interfaces to copy data between Taichi field and  **external arrays**.
External arrays refers to NumPy arrays or PyTorch tensors.

We suggest common users to start with NumPy arrays.

> The interface for PyTorch tensors is designed for Machine Learning (ML) people
> so that they could do GPU2GPU copy with less overhead.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
No need to mention this.

Interacting with NumPy
**********************

We provide interfaces to copy data between Taichi fields and NumPy arrays.

.. function:: field.to_numpy()

   :parameter field: (ti.field, ti.Vector.field or ti.Matrix.field) The field

   :return: (np.array) The numpy array containing the current data in ``x``.

.. function:: field.from_numpy(array)

   :parameter field: (ti.field, ti.Vector.field or ti.Matrix.field) The field

   :parameter array: (np.array) The numpy array containing data to initialize the field

Interacting with PyTorch
************************

We also provide interfaces to copy data directly between Taichi fields and PyTorch tensors.

> These functions allows you to directly copy from ``GPU -> GPU`` with **less memory overhead** than ``GPU -> CPU -> GPU``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
No need to mention this here. PyTorch users know what they are doing.

.. function:: field.to_torch(device = None)

   :parameter field: (ti.field, ti.Vector.field or ti.Matrix.field) The field

>    :parameter device: (torch.device) the device where torch tensor is created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :parameter device: (torch.device) the device where the PyTorch tensor is stored
```

>    :return: (torch.Tensor) The torch tensor containing the current data in ``x``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :return: (torch.Tensor) The PyTorch tensor containing data in ``x``.
```

.. function:: field.from_torch(tensor)

   :parameter field: (ti.field, ti.Vector.field or ti.Matrix.field) The field

>    :parameter tensor: (torch.Tensor) The torch tensor containing data to initialize the field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :parameter tensor: (torch.Tensor) The PyTorch tensor with data to initialize the field
```

Interacting with external arrays
================================

Introduction
------------

Although Taichi fields are mainly used in Taichi-scope, in some cases efficiently manipulating Taichi field data in Python-scope could also be helpful.

> So we provide a way to export and import data in Taichi fields via NumPy arrays.
> This allows you to interact with the data in Python-scope with other packages
> that supports NumPy.

Reviewer 3: This section is the introduction for interacting with the whole **external array**, so it does not sound right to directly talk about **providing interfaces for NumPy**, as NumPy is only part of **external array**.

What about inferring that Numpy is the most common cases, and introduce the 2 code blocks as the example.

```suggestion
We provide various interfaces to copy the data between Taichi fields and external arrays.
The most typical case maybe copying between Tachi fields and Numpy arrays. So, let's take a look at the 2 examples below.
```

  for i in range(n):
    for j in range(m):
      assert a[i, j] == i * j + i + j

.. note::

>    Struct-for's on external arrays are not supported.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   Struct-for's on external arrays are not supported in the Taichi kernel.
```

No idea if the struct for is supported in other magic packages or scopes.
